---
title: Theories and Practices of Nationalism: Assignment 2
author: Zubair Abid
layout: page
---

Write an essay on either of these two topics in about 800-1200 words. You have 
to submit this assignment by 23.59, on 18 Sept 2020. Please note that no 
extension request will be entertained as this assignment is being collected 
three days late from the schedule.

1. The United States of America and Canada are both countries which can be 
   classified as Civic Nationalist, where both have their origin in the same 
   context: British Colonialism and White Settler (Creole) Nationalism. 
   Similarly, Pakistan and Bangladesh can both be classified as Ethnic 
   Nationalist countries, with both having a similar origin in British Indian 
   colonialism and foregrounding religion and language as nationalist markers.
   Why did the USA and Canada emerge as distinct nations, just as why did 
   Pakistan and Bangladesh appear as different nations, despite similar origins?
   Can the theories of civic and ethnic nationalism explain them? What about the
   insights provided by E.H. Carr? Finally, which particular aspect of Benedict
   Anderson’s theory explains this distinction/division between these pairs?
2. Which of these two ideas take explanatory primacy in explaining the rise of 
   official and colonial nationalisms: the concept of bounded, border contained
   journeys, or the idea of print-capitalism combined with school education?

Note: Please use the internet to get information about the countries, examples 
used. However, please provide clear references. 

# Big Outline

## Introduction

- For the purpose of deciding the primacy of explanatory ideas, we'll be using
  Anderson [-@anderson_imagined_2006]
- I'll be trying to explain why print capitalism combined with school education
  takes explanatory primacy.
- To strengthen the argument, it's also important to realise that it's
  specifically these two (shared journeys, print capitalism) that enable the
  rise of nationalisms. Nationalist sentiments don't materialise simply among
  those sharing a common language, and in fact having the same language is not
  even a necessity.
  
## Lessons from Creole and European Linguistic Nationalism

- Why it isn't about Language:
    - [@nairn_break-up_2003] talks of 'the masses' being 'invited into history'
      by middle-class intelligentsia, only possible through a language they (the
      masses) understood; laying a framework for linguistic nationalism. But no
      explanation is given for the popularity of the idea, unless as Anderson
      says we "turn finally to piracy" [^andpir]
    - As we see from the chapter on creole nationalism, a common language did
      not unify the Latin American nations, and neither did the lack of one
      separate the multiple ethnicities rallying under the flag of a nation
      [^andcre1].
- A strong case for print primacy over the shared journey:
    - Anderson points out that in Madrid-controlled
      America, the shared journey had existed for almost three centuries
      [^andcretime]. He raises two factors used to explain the sudden rise of
      nationalism: the tightening of Madrid's control, and "the spread of
      liberalizing ideas of the Enlightenment". The latter is only possible in
      an environment of print capitalism - even though it had not yet "reached
      these illiterates", it (in the form of serialised newspapers) allowed the
      imagination of others in a shared time-space in the first place, making it
      a *prerequisite* for the shared journey to be realised and thus actualised
      in the first place.
    - For the rest of this, we will be taking (theory and) examples from the
      latter two stages, Official Nationalism and Colonial Nationalism, to
      demonstrate that this prerequisite nature applies across the board.

## Examining Official Nationalisms

- Official nationalisms aren't a bottom-up movement in themselves, but an 
  attempt by the existing State to retain its power by co-opting 19th Century
  Europe's linguistic nationalism. [^offintro]
  As a result of such, their explanation is founded in
  that of the previous phase. So we need to show primacy of print capitalism in
  Linguistic nationalism.
- The middle class' rise as
  the literate bourgeoisie imagining fraternity within limitations of mutual
  intelligibility is key to European linguistic nationalism
  [@anderson_imagined_2006, pp. 77-78], however 
  print capitalism did exist in Europe for quite a bit before nationalist
  sentiments finally came to light [^printing]
  . So one may assume it is not the 
  primary.
 
  However:
    - First, that you could not have "common journeys" that would split Europe
      the way the Americas were. Bureaucracy births common journey, and
      pre-national Europe has no common person's bureaucracy. The ruling class
      is more a large family of interconnected second and third cousins
      [^hanovereg]
      so they are not thinking in terms of nations. In feudal conditions
      too, power is hereditary and passed on by death [^andfeud]
    - This is not to say it doesn't have a part. Separate bureaucracies allow 
      for a common journeys among "countrymen" distinct from that of another, 
      serving to strengthen the national bonds, but the existence of said 
      bureaucracies has to be preceded by print capitalism creating the 
      awareness of nations and distinction in the first place.
- In addition, print is necessary for realisation of "non-divinity" of languages,  
  giving rise to the identification of languages with their native speakers.
  Growth of comparative history, [^andcomp]
- Official nationalism is also where we begin to see the impact of a State
  monopoly on Education. Prominent examples being of course, Russification and 
  Macaulayism. A formal study of requiring nationalism to be a dual-pronged
  approach was studied by Hobsbawn much after, [^hobsclass] , but the idea is 
  simple -
  educate the masses with a common language that allows them to see whatever has
  been defined for them as the Nation-state, along with the opportunity to
  participate in government. In colonial nations this allows a new kind of
  shared journey to arise, which we will discuss in a minute.
- All in all, the lesson from creole nationalism: print capitalism allows for
  the widespread vernacular usage as languages of print which allows for
  conception of a "native" land which allows for viewing language boundaries as
  boundaries which now makes older state powers co-opt the language into their
  state usage.

## Examining Colonial Nationalisms

### A significant display of border-contained journeys

- Scotland that does not show nationalist sentiment, versus Ireland. [^andscot]
- Cambodia from Vietnam, limitation on the Khmer and Lao.
- India, Bipin Chandra Pal. [@pal_memories_1932 pp. 329]
- Indonesia does not split apart, despite federalist policy [^andindoeduc]
- Point still is that for these conditions to arise something else needs to
  happen.

### State-monopoly on Education

- Natives getting into administrative positions only to be limited by boundaries
  and sharing a common goal cannot happen when they aren't educated by the State
  to fill roles in government in the first place.
- Indonesia: schools providing regulated gradations by age groups, a shared
  journey from the villages to the town centers. [^andindoeduc]
- Can be seen in India too.

### Print Capitalism's necessity and role beyond

- Of course, that ^ can't happen without print capitalism.
- Newspapers as manifestation, allowing the growth of vernacular. [^andnews]
- Newspapers in India and Pakistan. [^newsind]
- Interestingly: India here imagined by the administrative limits and the common
  language english, not like European nationalisms. In part due to ease of
  communication and information spread, too. Physical mobility.


[^andpir]: @anderson_imagined_2006 [pp. 80]. Here he refers to piracy as others
lifting the ideas of nations and nationalism from those who have already done so
and written it down as a model to use. It is something only possible when there
is a system of print capitalism in place.

[^andcre1]: See @anderson_imagined_2006 [pp. 47-48]

[^andcretime]: See @anderson_imagined_2006 [pp. 50, 61-63]

[^offintro]: @anderson_imagined_2006 [pp. 109-110] talks of official nationalism
as a response by power groups. We can also refer to @seton-watson_nations_1977
[pp. 147] which refers to *Kaisertreue* (loyalty to the emperor) as the
essential requirement over the concept of nationality.

[^printing]: @editors_printing_nodate gives the date for the Gutenberg Press in
the mid-15th century, but it is not until printing goes beyond reprints of the
Bible that we can assume "Print Capitalism" to have begun in Europe, which would
then place it in the early 16th century.

[^hanovereg]: Consider here the example of the House of Hanover - a "German"
royality ruling over Great Britain and Ireland.

[^andfeud]: See @anderson_imagined_2006 [pp. 55]

[^andcomplang]: Anderson cites Hobsbawm's "The Age of Revolution"
[-@anderson_imagined_2006] to highlight the consideration of comparative study
in the linguistic field of study.

[^hobsclass]: As discussed in class

[^andscot]: @anderson_imagined_2006 [pp. 90] refers to this: The Scottish had
"no barricades" in possible paths to the centre (England), compares to those in
the Thirteen Colonies, or even Ireland.

[^andindoeduc]: See @anderson_imagined_2006 [pp. 132]

[^andnews]: Anderson describes the spread of print-capitalism in
Spanish-controlled America in [-@anderson_imagined_2006 pp. 61-63] through
newspapers

[^newsind]: @india_role_2015 talks in some detail about the role of press in the
National Independence movement.

# Thin Outline

- Introduction:
    - What isn't: language, uniformity of language. 
    - Will specifically be one of those two, and here I think it will be print
      capitalism.
- Motivating with some context on Anderson's words on these with respect to
  Creole nationalism and Beginnings of European national "awakening":
    - First, why it isn't about just having same languages. Europe had common
      vernacular amongst peasantry long before.
    - Second, having same language is not a prerequisite for the nation. Early
      stage Latin America. There's some shared journey here.
    - Third, on why it's print: Anderson commented on this, wrt Creole
      nationalism - the shared journey exists for quite a while before the
      revolution(s).
    - Finally, idea of the "memory of print" that we will use.
- Now, we move on to examples
- ????


# Points

- ~~So official nationalism is a reactionary response to european awakening.~~
- ~~Monarchs adopting the nationalist garb to maintain power.~~
- ~~Official nationalism is as border-contained as European nationalism is,
  hence by language.~~
- Attempt to maintain political power by co-opting the linguistic national
  movements
- Under a common bureaucracy, journeys converge to be largely the same.
- It has to be preceded by Print Capitalism to set the structures in place
  first.
- Without print capitalism, there is no separation of administrative units. The
  monarchs are all interrelated via marriage, and no scope for vertical growth
  exists. In the feudal case, the heirs ascend via death. No common journey.
  Trade with each other is possible, so it's not unusual to move about. Consider
  Victoria, Queen of "England". Essentially, no common journeys separating the
  common folk across Europe. Even when as
  colonisers, they are the colonisers - those native to the land are capable of
  moving about as they please.
- Print capitalism allows for ideas of plurality, extra-European antiquity.
- A kinship separated by language that allows.

- Colonial and border-contained journeys: yes. See Scotland, vs all of British
  colonies, japanese colonies, etc. Borders as a source of resentment.
- A newspaper informing of events and allowing for dead time required to imagine
  the journey. Else you have the loneliness, but no apparent companionship.
- School system introduces another journey, from the villages through towns up
  to the apex at the cities.
- Indonesia being preserved through a common schooling.
- India and pakistan, common journeys and vernacular media split


@anderson_imagined_2006 says hi

@

- @pal_memories_1932, pp 329: "forced to cut myself off from the orthodox Hindu
  communion"
- @pal_memories_1932, pp 409: comparison to creoles

# References
