---
title: Theories and Practices of Nationalism: Assignment 3
author: Zubair Abid
layout: page
---

Attempt an answer in between 800 and 1200 words of either one of the following 
questions.

To be submitted by 11.59 pm on 20 Oct 2020 (No extension request will be 
entertained)

1. How does education in “invented” modern vernaculars explain nationalism in   
   India?
   
   *You are expected write on the use of Hindi, but if you want you can also 
   take up any other modern Indian vernacular as your example. You have to engage 
   with the ideas of Benedict Anderson, Ernest Gellner, and Eric Hobsbawm for 
   this assignment.*
   
   *You are also expected to read relevant portions from*
   - *[Thomas Babinton Macaulay, Minute on Education, 1835]*
   - *[Arthur Howell, Education in British India, 1872]*
   - *[Christopher King, One Language Two Scripts - Hindi Movement in 19C North
     India, OUP, 1995]*
   - *[Alok Rai, Hindi Nationalism, Orient Blackswan, 2018]*

    *Keep in mind that you are not expected to read the entire books but parts 
    of it based on what your requirements are.*



2. Explain the concept of “invented traditions” in your own words. How does it 
   link with nationalism and the nation-state? Use examples of invented 
   traditions which have become a part of national cultures, and some invented 
   traditions which have not.

    *You are expected to read*
    - Eric Hobsbawm, “Mass Producing Traditions: Europe, 1870-1914” in his book 
      [The Invention of Tradition].
    - Eric Hobsbawm, “The Nation as Invented Tradition” in [Oxford Nationalism
      Reader]



[Final Submission](./20171076_Nationalism_asgn3.pdf): 19/25






# Overview of ideas

- Some explanation on "Invented tradition" in itself. My definition, how it
  is created, what "invented" changes, types of invented traditions
- Elaborating slightly more to emphasise the point: On the interplay of
  tradition with customs as a prelude to Invention for Continuity
- Now, Invention for Continuity: still about Invented traditions, but is in
  direct relation to how it links to nationalism and the nation state.
- The central link: Hobsbawm's views on nationalism as constructed from above,
  and how continuity enables the people to follow that line.
- Demonstrating said link with the Invented Traditions of various nations, and
  the circumstances they arise in:
    - France as a model of general national symbolism, and minimization of
      history
    - German as a model of unification against some 'enemy'
    - The United States as a model of expressing nationalism in a heterogeneous
      immigrant-heavy environment

# Outline

- What invented traditions are:
    - Invented traditions are traditions that are claimed to be old, or are 
      perceived as old, but are in fact new(er than people assume them to be).
      They have supposed links to actions of the past, even if there were none.
    - Invented traditions are either intentionally created through political
      directive, or originate organically over time through regular practice of
      certain customs among people.
    - It is not entirely clear how Traditions are invented, either intentional
      or [organic](organic), as it has not been studied in too much detail. 
      [@hobsbawm_invention_1992, pp. 4]
    - Difference from old tradition: vague construction, strict adherence.
- Three types of:
    - Those establishing/symbolizing social cohesion or group membership in real
      or artificial communities
    - Those establishing/legitimizing institutions/status/relations of
      authority
    - Those with the purpose of socialization, and the inculcation of beliefs,
      value systems, and conventions of behaviour
- Quickly, traditions vs customs:
    - Customs are not tradition, although it is linked to tradition - the
      decline of a custom changes the tradition around it. How a lawyer's wig is
      not a matter of 'tradition' until it is no longer customary to wear a wig.
    - Customs come by repeated practice. The reason for their existence is often
      practical and not ideological, existing for bureaucratic efficiency, which
      can be changed as practically seen fit. In Marxist terms, they belong to
      the "base" and not the "superstructure" [@hobsbawm_invention_1992, pp. 3]
    - "Customs" are used often to give the sanction of precedence and social
      continuity to demands for protection and defence of practices 
      [@hobsbawm_invention_1992, pp. 2]. This plays into a key feature of
      Invented Traditions.
- The value of Invented Tradition in Continuity
    - A key feature is that Invented traditions are often used to establish
      continuity with some *suitable* historic past. Even for invented 
      traditions
      built on revolutions/progressive movements, there is some historic past 
      that is (has to be) constructed for acceptance (elaborated later). This 
      historic past does not need to be real, and is almost always embellished. 
      [@hobsbawm_invention_1992, pp. 7]. This is something we will see often
      with its usage in nations.
    - This allows invented traditions to be held as symbols of "invariance" in 
      times of rapid change in social patterns - establishing "time immemorial
      customs" that can, as we saw earlier, give the sanction of precedence and 
      legitimize change in the eyes of masses. Nominal continuities that have a
      major impact.
    - "Hobsbawm's point, however, is not to mock such fictions, but to highlight 
      the ideological importance of at least the perception of continuity with 
      the past." [@buchanan_dictionary_2018]
    - The use of Invented Traditions for such reasons is not limited to
      "traditional" societies alone, but also extends to "modern ones".
      Traditions are also given up, not due to need, but by intention.
    - How traditions can be invented - parties can make their own ones, co-opt
      existing traditions in a new light, or rework older traditions outside the
      boundary of their original imagination. They can even be completely made
      up. 
    - Sometimes, these invented traditions - even those espoused by self-defined
      'traditionalists' - have a clear break in continuity.

- Hobsbawm's theory of the nation aligns with Gellner's.
- The Nation preludes the Nation-State. 
- Small group of pioneers, intellectuals are politically motivated about the
  existence of a state, for whatever reason. Nation has been constructed from
  above.
- Need to get the masses in the picture too. The new state needs to justify its
  legitimacy as a ruler (especially when no suffrage). National identification
  of the people of the state as "of the nation" can't be forced from above with
  ideological arguments, do not assume the rational calculation of Individual
  members. Invented traditions can fake a past. Give abstract markers to shout
  for without any clear definition on what they are.
- Invented traditions aren't all, but focusing on only that. Also they don't
  guarantee success for the inventor, but the nation lived on.
- Lot of the construction thus is to justify consolidation of political power by
  classing under "nations". Requires the linking of National, Political, Social.
- Essentially, introducing Gemeinschaft into the Industrial society, status into
  a world of contract, normalising the change for people.
- Also used for spreading nationalism, of course.
- 

# General Points

- What are Invented tradition:
    - Commonly, claim to be old/are perceived as old but are actually new
    - Can be invented, either intentionally or organically
    - Symbolic use as traditions once no longer practical
- Tradition vs Custom:
    - Traditions come from custom
    - Tradition seems invariant, but depends on custom. Which is variant
    - Consider the customs of a conservative regimented army vs traditions of
      big game hunters
- Invented tradition for Continuity - intro to nationalist uses:
    - All the time, there is a past for continuity. It is factitious
    - Invention as a thing accompanying any change in society. Tradition used 
      for invariance
    - Can make their own, co-opt, or expand
- ...

- Nationalism of the few preludes the Nation-State, 'from above'. Invented
  traditions do not guarantee, but provide some support for, convincing the view
  from below.
- Invented Tradition and Nationalism:
    - Nationalism gets its history wrong to create the Nation.
    - This requires linking of National, Political, Social. Once that is done,
      nationalists can make use of Invented Traditions to:
        - bring Gemeinschaft into Industrial society, normalising it for people.
        - "make nationalists" through propaganda embedded into new institutions
          and systems. "peasants into frenchmen"
    - New traditions are dressed up with the garb of "ancient links".
    - French - alternate civic religion:
        - Secular eq of the church, education for creating masses
        - Public-facing ceremonies, Expression of state power and pomp
        - Public monuments mass-produced as symbols - Marianne.
    - Imagery sans history:
        - Tricolour
        - Monogram
        - Motto
        - Marseillaise
        - Marianne, statues
        - Bastille Day
    - French: non-historic imagery. Nation constructed by education and
      utilising love for the Revolution.
    - German: only commonality as being unified; extensive "historic" imagery.
      Nation constructed as in opposition to an "other"
    - USA: propaganda for americanising immigrants
    - India:
        - Nagari script
        - Cultural: Chai, Paneer, Sweets
        - Celebration of religions:
            - Ganesh Chaturthi
            - Durga Puja
            - Santoshi Mata
        - From French Marianne: Bharat Mata
        - From French Flag: National Flag
        - From British: National Anthem





[Thomas Babinton Macaulay, Minute on Education, 1835]: http://www.columbia.edu/itc/mealac/pritchett/00generallinks/macaulay/txt_minute_education_1835.html
[Arthur Howell, Education in British India, 1872]: link to be given
[Christopher King, One Language Two Scripts - Hindi Movement in 19C North India, OUP, 1995]: link to be given
[Alok Rai, Hindi Nationalism, Orient Blackswan, 2018]: find the link
[The Invention of Tradition]: ../readings/(Canto) Eric Hobsbawm, Terence Ranger - The Invention of Tradition -Cambridge University Press (1992).pdf
[Oxford Nationalism Reader]: find the link

[^trad]: As for what is tradition? That is outside the scope of this essay, although we can refer to @shils_tradition_1981 [pp. 12-13] for a brief summary. Broadly, we use it here as "that which is handed down - includes ... Beliefs about all sorts of things ...". The idea is that tradition allows people a connection to the past so to speak, thus giving them a view of what the past would have been like as described by said tradition.

[^ho_tradintconf]: See @hobsbawm_invention_1992 [pp. 4]

[^customdisc]: Customs are not the same as tradition. We elaborate on this soon.

[^ho_invdiff]: See @hobsbawm_invention_1992 [pp. 10-11]

[^ho_types]: See @hobsbawm_invention_1992 [pp. 9]

[^ho_trcont]: @hobsbawm_invention_1992 [pp. 7] mentions a few examples of embellished or straight-up falsified "histories" used to further national interests, such as the Czech medieval manuscripts

[^syminvar]: We have already spoke of tradition as shaping views of the past. It is taken as justification for future actions. An invented tradition then, posits a synthetic reality of the past. This link to the past gives an action the sanction of precedence and legitimizes its acceptance. It allows revolutionaries to claim that their desired future was the default since time immemorial, usurped only in recent memory by the vile parasites currently in control - earning sympathy, and often support.

[^cl_nov]: As discussed in class

[^ho_rat]: See @hobsbawm_invention_1992 [pp. 268-269]

[^ho_cust]: See @hobsbawm_invention_1992 [pp. 3]

[^ho_sanc]: See @hobsbawm_invention_1992 [pp. 2]
