---
title: |
  Introduction to Cognitive Science - Term Paper 2
author: 
- Zubair Abid (20171076)
subtitle: |
  Examining evidence against the Action vs Perception Hypothesis proposed by
  @goodale_separate_1992, with experiments on visual illusions
abstract: |
  @ungerleide_two_1982 proposed based on lesion studies on monkeys that in
  primate brains, visual information was processed in two streams -- dorsal and
  ventral. @goodale_separate_1992 reinterpreted this theory, making a species
  jump to humans and suggesting that the dorsal stream had the purpose of
  guiding the manipulation of objects (action) and the ventral stream did the
  computations necessary for object recognition (perception). I have picked two
  papers that disagree with this, one via experimentation
  [@franz_grasping_2000], and the other by an analysis of existing work at the
  time [@franz_action_2001]. In this term paper, I will be explaining the
  phenomenon being considered in the first place, the cognitive processes
  involved, a quick summary of the experiments and arguments, noted gaps in the
  treatment, potential extensions to the study, and my own suggestions on future
  experimentation.
  
layout: page
geometry: "left=3cm,right=3cm,top=3cm,bottom=3cm"
bibliography: ./termpaper2.bib
link-citations: true
linkcolor: blue
csl: /home/zubair/Zotero/styles/apa.csl
---

# What are we looking at?

Studies with visual illusions have been used to propose evidence for the
separate visual processing pathways theory. We're looking at
counter-arguments: studies that look at the same illusions with different
experimental setups and justify why the original proposal is not so.

## The original hypothesis, and responses 

In brief: the theory is that primate visual system is organised into two
parallel pathways. @goodale_separate_1992 suggested extending it to humans
too, using an experimental setup around the Ebbinghaus illusion. Hereon this
will be referred to as 'the hypothesis'.

Experiments agreeing with the hypothesis came early, most significant of them
being @aglioti_size-contrast_1995. Over time, more critical studies have come
about that tackle some of the gaps and flaws in the original experiments. 
I will be looking at one such response [@franz_grasping_2000] that sets up an 
experiment contradicting Goodale's [-@goodale_separate_1992] results, and also 
adds a few more to refute assumptions taken to be true in earlier work. I will
also look at @franz_action_2001, that summarises publications on the topic
at the time and highlights methodological concerns with the work agreeing 
with Goodale's [-@goodale_separate_1992] original hypothesis.

## The Cognitive Processes involved

- **Vision**: 
  
  The first cognitive process being looked at is visual perception -- the type
  required to correctly identify objects and perceive. The hypothesis suggests
  that this is a complex task as it involves elaborate processing for object
  recognition and conscious perception, and it takes up the *ventral* stream of
  processing. This processing gets tricked by illusions, as the vision for
  perception extrapolates from known experience [@doherty_ebbinghaus_2010].
- **Motor**: 
  
  The second cognitive process is motor skills, or more specifically,
  estimations that help guide motor movements based on observation. The idea is
  that the focus for such a task is on quick computation and short-term
  memory to quickly locate objects (that might be moving), hence bypassing the
  complex object recognition that the earlier process has to compute. This is
  said to take up the *dorsal* stream of processing.

# What has been shown: The Experiments and Arguments

For a quick background, all the experiments generally look for the effect of
illusions on perceptual and motor tasks. Work aligning with the separate visual
pathway theory will show a higher effect impact on perceptual tasks than motor
tasks. 

Most of the experiments use the Ebbinghaus illusion. *Perception* is usually
tested by asking the subject to try and adjust an external circle to match the
size of the central circle. If both are given simultaneously, the task can be to
try and adjust one or both of them to become the same size, but that is not
necessary. For *action*, the common task is to ask the subject to grasp the
central circle (which is always a physical object in these tests); various
adjustments are made against possible biases. External tracking systems are used
for this.

The most prominent result aligning with the hypothesis -- 
@aglioti_size-contrast_1995 -- found that there was less effect of the illusion
on grasping versus with perception. It is this work that is primarily responded
to by the following two papers.

## Grasping Visual Illusions: No Evidence for a Dissociation Between Perception and Action [@franz_grasping_2000]

They first noted some methodological issues with the Aglioti experiments:

1. The experiment was setup such that both visual stimuli were given side by
   side. This, they claim, increases time taken for visual perception, whereas
   with grasping the subject is only observing and acting on a single stimulus
   -- to give a name to it, the tasks were not cognitively balanced.
1. To justify giving visual stimuli side by side, the work had made an
   assumption that "the perceptual effects of the two Ebbinghaus figures simply
   add up to yield the effect obtained by the direct comparison". This had not
   been tested.

To test the above, three experiments were set up:

**Experimental setup 1**:

A similar overall setup to Aglioti's work was taken, with the key difference
being that only one of the stimuli was available to the subject at a time (in
sequence) for 825 ms. The results were contradictory to the Goodale hypothesis
-- the mean effect of illusion applied almost equally to both grasping and
perception tasks. In addition, subjects showing large perceptual illusion also
showed large motor illusion. 

To explain the contradiction in results with earlier work, they suggested that
the assumption being made on the validity of the "additive effect" -- that
the effect with direct comparison would merely be the sum of the effects with
separate comparisons -- was not true. Experiments 2 and 3 were setup to verify
this.

**Experimental setups 2 and 3**:

For experiment 2, the perceptual setup was repeated, only this time with
three variations: first with the experimental setup used in Experiment 1,
then with the setup by @aglioti_size-contrast_1995, and then with a third
setup they had proposed to simulate the grasping task of the original
studies. Results demonstrated exactly the goal of the experiment --
that *the perceptual effect of direct comparison was more than the sum of
the effects taken individually, and so the assumption of the additive 
effect was a failure of the original study*.

Experiment 3 was setup to counter a possible argument: that the original
setup had subjects compare the two disks immediately before grasping. This
setup was replicated by requiring participants to first compare the
central circles directly before the comparison to an isolated circle. In
theory, this simulates the grasping task imbalance of the original experiment, 
so if additivity is a
property of such then it should be demonstrated here too. Results, again,
indicated otherwise -- direct comparison was greater than the sum of
separate comparisons.

## Action does not resist visual illusion [@franz_action_2001]

The work looked at a number of studies on the matter of perception vs action.
Recent work (for 2001) generally tended to agree that there were "significant 
effects of visual illusions on grasping", others showed effects that are "close 
to being significant" but weren't actually there, and one paper showed a 
reversed effect -- a negative impact of visual illusions on grasping. Franz 
argues that if grasping did resist visual illusions (aka if Action and 
Perception did indeed have separate visual pathways), then there would be more 
reversed, or non-significant effects, and fewer results that agreed that there
was a significant effect of illusions on grasping.

The studies were generally classified into three classes:

1. Studies that used standard perceptual measures and did not task-normalise:
   such as @aglioti_size-contrast_1995 and others along the same vein. All of
   these demonstrated either an insignificant impact of illusions on actions, or
   no impact at all.
1. Studies that used standard perceptual measures and did task-normalise: such
   as @franz_grasping_2000. These identified the perception vs grasping tasks in
   the former work as a deficiency, and all such work agreed that visual
   illusions did have a significant impact on actions.
1. Studies that did not use standard perceptual measures: these have a few
   problems, all of them stemming from the non-standard perceptual measures
   used. First of all, "it is unclear whether these measures can be interpreted
   as perceptual measures". Secondly, the measures yield inconsistent results --
   to the point where Franz has disregarded the results of all such work.

The paper also responds to some general arguments for the existence of separate
processing streams (in the context of the illusion-perception-action tasks).

1. Some suggested that the correlation may be due to *partial* involvement of the 
   perceptual stream in motor functions. This argument is discarded on grounds
   of methodological problems, as it is now assuming that the motor system is 
   less affected by visual illusions than perception.
1. Others proposed that there is an independent motor illusion generated. But
   again, studies along these lines either showed very small
   significant/non-significant effects, or were using nonstandard measures --
   and hence discarded.

# Gaps and How to extend it

The work is not without its flaws. There remain some gaps in the processes
employed by the experimental paper, especially, that could do with some
improvement.

1. In the grasping tasks, the central circle is a 3D object while the circles
   surrounding it are 2D images on a screen. This, as the authors themselves
   acknowledge, reduces the perceptual effect on the subject of the experiment.
   They have made measures to counter it -- by having the screen at an angle to
   try and ensure the viewer sees a consistent image, and reducing the thickness
   of the central disc to only 5mm. However, this could do with improvements. 
   
   **Possible addition**: instead of having the setup as a physical-computer
   screen hybrid, we could theoretically replace it with an all-physical setup.
   This would be rather expensive however, and not easy to quickly prototype
   with.
1. Experiment 3 in @franz_grasping_2000 is sort of hand-wavy -- it suggests that
   it is a reasonable simulation of the grasping setup from
   @aglioti_size-contrast_1995, but that is just described without explanation
   -- the only one given is that the time difference is similar.
   
   **Possible addition**: A more formalised explanation of how exactly the third
   experiment was a good representation of the grasping task in a visual
   setting.
1. @carey_action_2001 suggested that the results meant that the motor system 
   only takes into account a close area around the target, while the perceptual 
   system has to attend to the whole thing. It does not necessarily imply that
   there is an issue with the assumed additive property.

# References

