---
title: Class-work Activity 5
author: Zubair Abid (20171076)
---

**Recall from the previous few classes on memory:**
- **Encoding Techniques**
- **Sensory memory**
- **Serial Position Effect**
- **Why eye-witness testimony is not a good practice - evaluate the process from
  memory perspective**

1. Encoding Techniques: 
   
   Encoding is the process by which memory is encoded. When getting sensory
   input, we recognise the object, then try and categorise it, and then commit
   to memory.
   
2. Sensory Memory: 
   
   Given a bunch of stimuli at the same time, a person will recall less and less
   the longer the time between the stimuli and the time they are asked to
   report. If they're given three rows of 4 letters with different notes (high,
   low, and medium), then asked to present partial reports of all the letters
   corresponding to a note, the longer the time between the stimuli and the
   question, the less they would recall. 
   
3. Serial Position Effect:  
   
   Due to Short-Term Memory (< 30s), when given a list, people tend to remember
   the elements at the start of the list, and at the end of the list. Recall of
   information in the middle of the list is reduced.
   
4. Why eye-witness testimony is not a good practice: 
   
   Memory does not act like a camera, and can be modified when looked back at.
   When asking questions to an eyewitness, by asking leading questions the
   recall of what the eyewitness saw can be modified. Also, as we saw earlier if
   the perceptual load is high, then the details recalled are less accurate.
