---
title: Class-work Activity 2 and 3
author: Zubair Abid (20171076)
---

# Activity 2

**a. How perceptual load has determined the scope of attention in "eye-witness 
study shared in class". Look at the slide 47. You can refer to the paper as well 
:-)**

**Ans.** In short, the eye-witness study determined that the scope of attention
was more constrained, leading to inaccurate testimony, when perceptual load was
high. [^at]

In the eye-witness study, participants were asked to watch a
minute-long video featuring a robbery, with the knowledge that they would be
questioned on the details after. The perceptual load was set by changing the
number of objects on the scene, with the higher load being a more cluttered
environment with multiple posters on the wall. The video comprised a woman
entering the office and stealing a number of items, and a man walking by the
window and pausing to look in for a few seconds. The participants were asked, 
among other questions, to identify the thief and the eyewitness, and if the
thief was wearing a watch - and they were asked this with a time gap, and the
questions could be regular or leading.

The results: with higher perceptual load, identification of the eyewitness and
the thief were both lower. With lower load in both tasks, participants averaged 
around 60% accuracy, but with higher loads accuracy for thief identification
dropped to around 50%, and accuracy for witness identification *dropped to
around 20%*. This fits the theory that with higher perceptual load, the
selection process employed is early-stage - very basic feature processing is
used, leading to poorer results. We can determine through this that the
attentional scope in this case is low.

**b. How the scope of attention determined the accuracy of eye-witness 
testimony?**

**Ans.** In summary, the study determined that with low-scoped attention,
eyewitness testimony can be incredibly inaccurate, especially if leading
questions are asked by attorneys.

We have already determined that with higher perceptual load, the scope of
attention is low. Moving on to the leading vs regular questions: in both cases
of low and high perceptual load (high attention and low attention scopes,
respectively), the accuracy drops. But when the perceptual load is high,
accuracy drops by 75%, from 80% to 20%. With low load, the drop is minor - from
85% to 75%. 

# Activity 3

**Dual or Multi-task performance - Analysis of time, using different perceptual
modalities, motor, and cognition, of Byrne and Anderson (2001) study. You are 
expected to think and draw similar to time event sharing used an explanation for
Schumacher et al. (2001) results.**

**Ans.** In the first study [^byr], participants were required to look at three
numbers, and if the first and second added up to the third, press a number, and
report the product of multiplying the first and the third number. Like with the
Schumacher et al. (2001) study [^schu], there are multiple modalities of
perception (speech and manual action being unique to each task in this case) but
vision and central cognition are shared, with the latter acting as a bottleneck.

![The time-sharing like in Schumacher (2001), showing the cognitive bottleneck](./3_graph1.png)

![How the process will proceed, due to the bottleneck](./3_graph2.png)

[^at]: Murphy, G., & Greene, C. (2016). Perceptual Load Affects Eyewitness Accuracy and Susceptibility to Leading Questions. Frontiers in Psychology, 7.

[^byr]: Byrne, M. D., & Anderson, J. R. (2001). Serial modules in parallel: The psychological refractory period and perfect time-sharing. Psychological Review, 108(4), 847.

[^schu]: Schumacher, E. H., Seymour, T. L., Glass, J. M., Fencsik, D. E., Lauber, E. J., Kieras, D. E., & Meyer, D. E. (2001). Virtually perfect time sharing in dual-task performance: Uncorking the central cognitive bottleneck. Psychological science, 12(2), 101-108.
