---
title: |
  Theories and Practices of Nationalism Term Paper
author: 
- Zubair Abid (20171076)
subtitle: |
  Will nationalism survive globalisation? Or will globalisation, in its current 
  information technology mediated version, lead to the fading away of 
  nationalism and nation-states?
abstract: |
  Something something summary of paper
  
layout: page
geometry: "left=3cm,right=3cm,top=3cm,bottom=3cm"
bibliography: ./termpaper.bib
link-citations: true
linkcolor: blue
---

# Introduction

Googling to learn about globalisation brings about an interesting dichotomy.
Half the results talk about "The Death of globalisation", while the other half
talk of "globalisation as the future of Humanity". What gives?
 
We will be examining that -- to an extent.
In this paper, we are more specifically looking to see if and how
globalisation would impact the existence of nationalism and the nation-state.

For understanding globalisation we rely heavily on @scholte_globalization_2005,
and we compare it against the various theories taught in class to demonstrate
why we think nationalism will *not* be superseded by globalisation. However, we
will put some emphasis at the end to the theory the minimal self-reproducing 
unit required to sustain a community, introduced by @gellner_nations_1983
[^gell_lab].

# Globalisation is not dead; What even is it?

To make a case for or against globalisation, we need to know what it is. As it
is such a poorly defined concept, it would perhaps be wiser to begin with what
it isn't.

## What globalisation is not

When looking up globalisation, one is likely to meet a flood of articles --
most, financial thinkpieces -- announcing its death. Hence you have
@saval_globalisation_2017 writing on the "fall" of Globalisation due to (then)
recently elected world-leaders opting for "nation first" approaches, or
Michael O' Sullivan calling for a "new [multipolar] world order"
[-@noauthor_globalisation_2019]. These operate under an understanding of "globalisation" as a synonym for
"internationalisation". Such a definition is not beneficial to begin with
[^schol_prem] due to the redundancy. It also reduces globalisation to the
limits of internationalisation, which by definition conceives the idea of
nations as the primary political unit.

Another common thread is to align it with liberalisation -- removing official
border constraints on international trade and the like -- making globalisation
about the spread of contemporary neoliberal macroeconomic policies
[^schol_neolib]. The usual arguments about invalidity due to reduction apply,
but this is important because as a policy implementation of
'globalisation' for a majority of corporations and many countries, it is
common to assume *neoliberalist globalisation* to be the only one available,
and thus (the authors comment that) most opponents to
to 'globalisation' are often just opposed to *neoliberalist globalisation*.

Yet others define globalisation as universalisation, or globalisation as
westernization (more specifically *anglification*, with the culture of the
United States and the United Kingdom as the 'universal'). Albeit different, we
discuss them together in the interest of space. Universalisation talks of
uniformity all across. Naturally the reduction argument can be applied again,
but more specifically plenty of variation is made to 'global' products -- kosher
McDonald's in Israel and the McAloo Tikki (and Halal) in India, for example. As
for apparent Americanization -- while globalisation has tended to follow the
trend, it isn't at all a one way road. Just looking at all the cuisines
available almost everywhere confirms as much.

## Globalisation as a shift in social space

- For definition, we primarily use the proposal put forth by 
  @scholte_globalization_2005 - globalisation as a shift in the social space,
  expressed through the spread of transplanetary
  and supraterritorial connections between people. 
- Spatiality: operating now on Planet Earth, and not as a nation, or a village,
  or a community. This is a bold claim, and we're trying to justify why we claim
  that the social space has in fact shifted so much
- Transplanetary relations: by no means new, but definitely higher numbers due
  to cheap air travel. More social relations, more economics, more diseases,
  etc. Which is great, but it doesn't take us all the way there to a "shift" as
  described previously. Which is where supraterritoriality comes in.
- This is where communication comes in big: also the telephone, but especially
  the internet. Supraterritorial:
  
  > As the word suggests, ‘supraterritorial’ relations are social connections 
  > that substantially transcend territorial geography. They are relatively
  > delinked from territory, that is, spatial domains that are mapped on the 
  > land surface of the earth, plus any adjoining waters and air spheres.
  > [^scholte_supra]
  
  Fast worldwide travel. Shared currencies, and exchange rates. Ecological
  changes affecting everyone. Global sports events. Events in Wuhan changing
  planetary history. Imagination of a common 'humanity' that gets emphasised
  whenever even private agencies like SpaceX send people to the ISS.
- Essentially: globalisation is a paradigm shift in many ways. Will it stand the
  test against nationalism?

# Why do people herald the death of the nation-state?

- Given this rudimentary understanding of globalisation, we are yet to examine
  exactly why it has been heralded as the successor to the ideology of
  nationalism. We look at that now.
- For some context, we should be aware that the bulk of the work surveyed was in
  the 90s/early 2000s, in the heyday of global optimism.

## A Paradigm Shift

- The conditions that allowed globalisation as a viable ideology -- better
  communication and transport across vast distances -- was a paradigm shift in
  how people perceived the world. One might imagine instantaneous communication
  akin to the printing press [^press_comm], a revolution in communication -- the
  way the latter was the herald of print capitalism. And not just telephonic or
  internet network-based communications: broadcast radio and television, global
  brands in peoples' day-to-day lives, and the
  ability to travel the world in under a day all brought about an awareness of
  'global consciousness' to the masses, something that was a hundred years ago 
  "generally limited to fleeting perceptions in limited élite circles"
  [^schol_globcons]. Globalisation -- when not perceived as Internationalisation
  -- allows people to imagine themselves as global citizens in a discourse
  dominated by nation, be a "man without his shadow" sans the ostracization
  [^gell_shadow].

## Democratization of the Internet, if only for a brief moment

- A key factor played by the internet here is in its access to a bilateral
  information flow -- and in earlier days, the general democratic nature
  [^intanarch] of it.
- Previously with radio and television, information flow was centralised. Sure,
  people could talk to each other on the phone in a rudimentary peer-to-peer
  "network", but it did not match the scale the government, or ad company, or
  media group had. This is something we consider central to Gellner's theory of
  community self-reproduction: when the nation controls the information, even
  with democratic checks and balances the propaganda required to sustain the
  state can come through unfettered and unchallenged. With the internet as an
  open-to-all forum, the means of publishing was decentralised (if only for a
  short while) [^intreach].
- Chat rooms and USENETs/Forums gave people the ability to talk to a lot of
  people they did not know, unlike with telephones where at least some
  knowledge of the other person was a prerequisite. Access to a global state of
  sorts, in line with the respatialization mentioned earlier.
- This is not entirely the case now. Private corporations based in the United
  States provide much of the services we use on the internet today, and users
  are bound to adhere to the rules set in place by them -- sometimes in good
  faith, sometimes not. China monitors their entire population of a billion and
  some more.
- Even under corporate control, there is still dissemination of information from
  more than just one side. It is only under censorship -- which does happen --
  that groups are unable to share their opinions, and so far these are mostly
  bypassable censors by individual companies. As for States trying to control
  the content on the internet, well, as [@conversi_irresponsible_2012, pp. 13]
  puts it:
  
  > Attempts to control the web over ideological content and ethnic dissent can 
  > occur only at the price of curtailing fundamental human rights.
- Gellner called nationalism "inherently weak", requiring constant propaganda to
  keep up the nationalist sentiment. A democratic mass communication system seems 
  to be, at first glance, at odds with that. But Gellner's statement was on the
  influence of a particular nation, and not nationalism the concept as a whole.
  The democratization of the internet did change *some things* with regards to
  nations, but it was never realistically competing against the ideology as a
  whole.

## Misc.

- Scholte said that State remains, character shifts. Sometimes it isn't the only
  mode of governance any more, some times not even the principal one. Continuity
  theorists claim otherwise. Theoretically, a global company by its refusal to
  engage in business in a country, can influence to an extent the laws and
  regulations of the business. However as China showed, this may not be true
  with Chinese divisions of major global companies with different rulebooks
  popping up due to internal competition. However however, it *is* China so
  universal applicability may vary.
- @bamyeh_ends_2000 makes some bold claims in his book, "The Ends of
  Globalisation", speaking of the inherent totalitarianism of nations
  [^bamyeh_total] and the inevitability of globalisation. His analysis is
  pre-9/11 and slightly dated for the reason -- not anticipating the infusion of
  purpose the attacks would give the American people a year later, he claims the
  nation is "purposeless", assigning vague enmity to sporadic terrorist groups
  in a drought of rivals in the post-Cold War period. In a review of his work
  @podobnik_review_2006 mentins that his discussion on the likely trajectory of
  global capitalism is "somewhat problematic" -- that capital had not in fact,
  contrary to claims, managed to reacquire autonomy from political regulation,
  as evidenced by post 9/11.

# Comparing against Nationalism

Over class, we have discussed many ways to analyse why Nationalism is as
strong as it is. So now, we will apply the same lenses of analysis to
Globalisation as well. In the following section, we will take some of the
popular explanations of nationalism, and try to look for modern-day equivalents
for globalisation, or demonstrate how the existing explanation either helps or
hinders the global plan.

## Anderson's Imagined Community

Anderson's theory of imagined community [@anderson_imagined_2006]
has had far-reaching impact on the study
of nation-states and nationalism. The idea itself is simple -- any community
larger than a village of a few hundred is imagined; with a nation this number is
somehow scaled up a few orders of magnitudes to tens, hundreds, and thousands of
millions. Most of these people will never meet each other, and there will be a
lot of difference in class, creed, and so on; but the nation is still conceived
as a horizontal community, with its citizens willing to die for the abstract
concept of this nation and the imagined brotherhood among those that live in it.
In a sense, Anderson notes, it is more like religion than a strongly formed
political ideology (like Marxism). This allows the nation and its nationalists
to look past the various paradoxes nationalism brings with it.

A key feature of nationalism is that the community is restricted -- the
existence of nationals implies the existence of non-nationals, and at no point
is there (most of the time) a desire to expand so far as to conquer the entire
world under the banner of "India", for instance. Wars are primarily
fought over resources and not land, when they are fought.

In order to compete with nationalism, globalisation will have to somehow attain
an imagined community encompassing the entirety of the planet's human life,
while attaining similar levels of political power. To that extent, it is worth
looking at some of the mechanics Anderson described as tools of nationalist
propaganda: (border-contained) shared journeys and print capitalism. For
globalisation to succeed in overtaking nationalism as the most significant
ideology of our times, we will have to examine newer mechanisms that perform
similarly.

**Global communication networks** is the print capitalism of the modern age.
Like print capitalism bringing about a change in the imagination of a shared
space and common and free time among those residing within a nation, the
existence of global networks of communication -- either peer-to-peer or as large
groups, but primarily the latter --  enables the imagination of the planet as a
shared common space of human beings, rather than a collective of nations
engaging in diplomacy. This is absolutely crucial for the respatialization
defined earlier as the need for understanding the new framework of
globalisation, and is the closest equivalent there is to print capitalism, by
Anderson's theories.

Where the parallels fall of however are with regards to (border-contained)
shared journeys. First of all, they cannot be border-contained if the goal is to
have a global shared journey. Most commonly known shared journeys shared by
people across the world are either religious -- such as pilgrimages like the
Hajj -- or national, such as moving to the United States from a third-world
country for better prospects and living out "The American Dream". There is no
explicit non-religious equivalent of this shared journey with globalisation.

Some might make a case for **"shared experiences"** that the benefits of global
broadcast bring to us all -- such as watching man on the moon in the 60s, the
four-yearly cycle of tuning in to the Olympics, millions of people across the
world watching a K-Pop band premiere their music video on youtube. These are all
valid, and online communities do spring up on the basis of such shared
interests, but none of these are of the type that can replace the imagined
community of nation -- at least, not yet.

Finally, to come back to global communication networks, it is true that they
help the imagination of the 'global community' -- but they are also employed by
nationalist forces. We shall come back to it in a later section, but it is a
theme that will persist through the rest of the subheadings.

## Kohn's Replacement for Religion

The similarity of Nationalism to Religion wasn't noticed just by Anderson --
Kohn spoke extensively on the matter. Quoting him,

> ... man’s loyalty was due to his church or religion; a heretic put himself out
> of the pale of society in the same way that a “traitor” to his nation does
> today. [^kohn_heretic]

In fact, one of the key downsides of earlier philosophically rich global
ideologies like Marxism and Liberalism had been that, steeped in reason, they
failed to answer the question of purpose. Why are we here? It is a question that
cannot be attempted scientifically, as there is no observation that can be made.
Marxism and Liberalism could go on about dialectics and rights, but only
the Church provided an answer to purpose -- at least until nationalism. The
ideology of a community of brotherhood, a higher cause to look forward to (the
benefit of the nation), attachment to an abstract concept that was supposedly
ancient, just lost to the sands of time.

It is this 'completeness' that allowed nationalism to eventually hold strong and
retain its place while the other ideologies either disappeared, or reformed
themselves under its wing. Now we must question if globalisation could hold up
to the same standards of spiritual completeness.

But globalisation is not a religious doctrine; it does not demand allegiance or
piety to a God or a Nation equivalent. At best, one can assume the purpose of
'furthering mankind', but all beyond is personal speculation. Globalisation does
not seem up to the task of non-rational attachment.

## Gellner's Nationalism precedes Nations

Among Gellner's best known theories is the idea that Nationalism precedes
Nations [@gellner_nations_1983]. That industrial society brings about with it a
number of changes such as more general education, and easier training periods
for a multitude of jobs. This allows for the creation of a "homogeneous
culture",  which in turn is finally responsible for the initiation of a shared
bond among the already-homogenized populace.

For an equivalent Global world to rise, therefore, there must be at least a
degree of homogeneity across all the people on the planet -- such that a
globalised political system can rise in place of the various nations at the
moment. We have already mentioned that University is *not* globalisation,
although aspects of it naturally bleed into the respatialization worldview. That
being said, there is a degree of local variation introduced with 'universal'
experiences (not that it affects nations).

The biggest actual challenge to the idea of globalisation taking over
nationalism from such standpoint is that nationalism is still an incredibly
dominant ideology: many that immigrate out of compulsion, for instance, feel as
strongly about their host nation as any other resident would. It is possible
that via global communication networks a resident may begin to disbelief the
propaganda of their government, but they are unlikely to swear off of the idea
of nations altogether.

## Hobsbawm's Invented Traditions

Instrumental to having a nation is believing in its paradoxes: that despite its
recent construction the nation is ancient, or that any arbitrary group of people
living within the territorial boundaries in the past would have considered
themselves to be people of the nation, despite no such concept existing at the
time [^schol_mt]. Hobsbawm's *invented traditions* [@hobsbawm_invention_1992]
explains how, despite the absence of any sort of evidence of antiquity, many
'traditions' considered sacred by various communities are, in fact, made up and
intentionally dressed up as ancient, or simply accidents that got memorialised
as tradition just because.

It is not entirely unthinkable that an invented tradition for a global society
could be made up -- after all, Scholte pointed out that several people believe
that globalisation is nothing new, and simply another iteration in an
always-running cycle. It is also possible that the invented traditions of
individual nations might give way for the global cause. It is however unlikely
that all nations would fold over without noticing something off.

## Likening to the "Colonial Indian Elite"

- The colonial indian elite were the ones with aspirations of nationalism/of
  having a say in policies for them
- Globalisation is the upper middle classman's dream, and the upperclass'
  reality. Idea of the global citizen: taking advantage of the best options
  available to one, without national bindings.
- Needs a Gandhi-type beat.

# Information-mediated Nationalism

- Despite all the benefits accorded to globalisation by the
  information-mediated nature of modern society, these benefits are available to
  the national movements too.
- Anderson [@anderson_long-distance_1998]
  already spoke of many -- immigrants, for example -- engaging in
  long-distance politics without the accountability attached. He mentions how
  this will be improved with time. Maybe, this will only apply to first
  generation immigrants, *maybe* their children, but any more?
- Conversi [@conversi_irresponsible_2012]
  on why long-distance might not work out. The militant diaspora thing.
- Eriksen's quote. [@eriksen_nationalism_2007]

# Concluding

- Have mentioned enough reasons that globalisation should not *replace*
  nationalism. It might exist alongside. I'll add some more reasons, sort of
  informally, then propose something that might in fact replace nations and
  nationalism as a consequence of their inability to deal with a global
  framework.
- Nations and globalisation are mutually incompatible as it leads to a violation
  of Gellner's nationalist sentiment in global economy. Also, countries are not
  able to deal with companies operating in a 'global' context
- Even if you broke away from Nations and made it individual States of
  residence, incentivising States for person retainment would reintroduce
  nations, as an emotional conduit to raise support for state governance.
- Most people do not move [@cohn_who_2008]. For them companies like Facebook is
  a social bubble, so the internet does not provide access to the globe either.
- What is key is control over devices of reproduction: schooling and mass
  communication. The government controls, but corporations...
- Pobodnik mentions that capital has not managed to reacquire autonomy from
  political regulation, but especially with tech sector being new ground,
  lots of gaps showing up in the national framework (methodological
  territorialism from Scholte). The new East India Company.
- Globalisation would require policy implementation, but those in charge of
  education either favour national interests (government) or neoliberal
  interests (corporations). No framework for reproduction.
- Statelessness as an example, unable to continue without a framework of
  reproduction and trampled effectively by the advent of communication and
  fast, convenient travel.

# References

[^gell_lab]: More specifically, Gellner specified the need for a community to
sustain an independent educational system if it hoped to sustain itself in
modern society [see @gellner_nations_1983, pp. 32]. We will explore this later.

[^schol_prem]: See [@scholte_globalization_2005, pp. 52-54], on how
definitions should try to "advance knowledge", and why the new word should not 
be expressible as a synonym for another existing concept. Redundancy in general
is a feature most definitions to try and shy away from.

[^schol_neolib]: [@scholte_globalization_2005, pp. 56]. As the book says,
"large-scale globalization and widespread economic liberalization have
frequently transpired concurrently in the past quarter-century ...  it is quite  
something else to conflate the two concepts, so that globalization and 
liberalization become the same thing."

[^press_comm]: It is true that telephonic conversation was a thing since the
late nineteenth century, but as Scholte noted in his chapter "Globalization in
History", early phone and telegraph systems were slow, unreliable, and very
expensive -- as such, unavailable to a vast majority of even the 'civilised'
world.

[^schol_globcons]: [see @scholte_globalization_2005, pp. 116]

[^gell_shadow]: [@gellner_nations_1983, pp. 6] spoke of how it is
near-impossible for someone to imagine themselves nation-less: statelessness is
still imaginable, if not viable, but to be without a nation would be like a man
without a shadow (his interpretation of a book by Chamisso, a French immigrant
in Germany).

[^intanarch]: Now, a case can be made to claim that the early internet was
*anarchist*, not democratic. The point here is that it was not controlled by
centralised State governments, or private firms.

[^intreach]: It is worth clarifying that "mass communication" was limited to
people capable of getting on the internet in some capacity, which -- without the
ample support of governments and corporations, is a rather small number limited
primarily to enthusiasts and academics. So while it is one thing to wax and wane
about the "death of the free and democratic internet", it was never a democratic
system in the first place if only a small "elite" could access it -- and the
unfettered universal reach of the netizen-journalist was limited to this group.

[^scholte_supra]: [see @scholte_globalization_2005, pp. 61]

[^bamyeh_total]: @bamyeh_ends_2000 says,
"In an age of nation-states, everyone wanted to hear the good news that 
nationalism and totalitarianism could be disentangled from each other. Only a 
few had the bad manners to try to spoil the feast by pointing out the obvious, 
namely, that the preconditions of totalitarianism ... for example, 
singled out—the transformation of classes into masses, the elimination of all 
group solidarity, a pervasive sense of individual loneliness—are conducive just 
as well to national mobilization."

[^kohn_heretic]: [see @kohn_nature_1939]

[^schol_mt]: See methodological territorialism, [@scholte_globalization_2005,
pp. 66]
