---
title: Theories and Practices of Nationalism - HW02
author: Zubair Abid, 20171076
layout: page
---

**Which aspect of Stalin's definition of nationalism is still useful?**

**And which aspect of his definition of nationalism is now obsolete**

**Ans**: Stalin's definition of nationalism of a "historically constituted...
~~stable~~ community of people" formed on the basis of a "common territory"
that is not "racial or tribal"[^1] and "is subject to change" is still a 
valid and useful definition. It
excludes individual tribes or dynastic enterprises like Alexander the Great's,
and most modern nations are territorially bound geographic locations due to the
requirement of having to live in a common region.

Most notably obsolete is Stalin's requirement that the nation must comprise of
people who satisfy *all* the conditions of having 

1. A common language
2. A common territory
3. A common Economic life
4. A psychological makeup manifested in a common culture.

While the second is still true, and maybe the third, the rest are not.
Multilingual populaces of a single nation are examples abound, and even "common
culture" is not a truth, considering the example of just India. Especially
considering the existence of Civic Nationalism as the dominant form present
today, wherein the only official requirement is adherence to the code defined 
within the (coincidentally geographically bound) region. This requirement was in
his own words to account for Austria and Russia not being separate nations at
the time.

[^1]: https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/stalin/works/1913/03a.htm#s1, 
paragraph three.
