---
title: Theories and Practices of Nationalism - HW05
author: Zubair Abid, 20171076
layout: page
---

**Look at the Poorna Swaraj Resolution of 1929, and the Karachi Congress of 
1931, and explain how Indian Nationalism was a form of civic nationalism. 
400 words, 11.59pm tonight**

*Ans.* Based on the Poorna Swaraj resolution and the Karachi Resolution,
Bipin Chandra's theory of Indian Nationalism as a civic nationalism holds.

The applicability of his theory will be tested against the tenets of:

- Nationalism emerging out of the primary contradiction of *economic
  exploitation* by the British
- The imagined nationalism unites people with different interests, where ethnic
  demands "aren't nationalism"

A quick look at the two resolutions immediately belies the influence of this
line of thought: both are heavily focused on National interests in economic
terms, with the Karachi resolution explicitly stating "political freedom must 
include real economic freedom".

The Declaration of Poorna Swaraj[^p] states that the British government has 
"... based itself on the exploitation of the masses, and has ruined India ...",
calling thereon for complete independence. It then details how the economic ruin
of the nation - via disproportionate taxation, collapse of village industries,
unfair advantages to British manufacturers, and more - has reduced the nation
politically, culturally, and spiritually. There is no call on behalf of "Indian
ethnicity" of any sort.

Likewise with the Karachi resolution[^k]: after demanding economic freedom, it
goes on to "state the position of the Congress" as a list (showing relevant 
ones):

- Fundamental rights, including that "No disability to attach to any person of
  religion, caste or creed" in regard to employment, office, or trade and "Equal
  rights and obligations [and access to public areas]"
- Religious neutrality of the state - no imagination of nation on the basis of
  religion
- There are a number of worker focused clauses hinting at the economic aspect:
    - A requirement for living wage, limited hours of labour.
    - Protection of women workers, and prohibition of child labour
    - The right for labour to form Unions

Again, the call for Nationalism is not ethnic, but based on ideas of rights -
civic. The two resolutions highlight too the demand of nationalism arising from
grounds of economic exploitation, as per what has been said by Bipin Chandra.

[^p]: https://www.constitutionofindia.net/historical_constitutions/declaration_of_purna_swaraj__indian_national_congress__1930__26th%20January%201930
[^k]: https://www.constitutionofindia.net/historical_constitutions/karachi_resolution__1931__1st%20January%201931
